>> Sreenivasan: ON THIS EDITION
FOR SUNDAY, MAY 14:
INTERNATIONAL CONDEMNATION
FOLLOWING THE LATEST MISSILE
LAUNCH FROM NORTH KOREA.
IN OUR SIGNATURE SEGMENT,
CONSERVATIVE REPUBLICAN VOICES
CALLING FOR ACTION ON CLIMATE
CHANGE.
AND WHAT'S BEHIND AMERICA'S
RISING MATERNAL MORTALITY RATE.
NEXT ON PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
>>FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS
AT LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
HARI SREENIVASAN.
>> Sreenivasan: GOOD EVENING,
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
CRITICISM AND CONSTERNATION
TODAY FOLLOWING ANOTHER, AND
MORE ALARMING, BALLISTIC
MISSILE LAUNCH BY NORTH KOREA.
JAPAN'S DEFENSE MINISTER SAYS
THE MISSILE MAY BE A NEW TYPE,
AND U.S. OFFICIALS ARE TRYING TO
DETERMINE EXACTLY WHAT IT WAS,
THOUGH THEY SAID IT APPARENTLY
WAS NOT AN INTERCONTINENTAL
BALLISTIC MISSILE.
IT WAS LAUNCHED YESTERDAY FROM A
SITE NORTHWEST OF PYONGYANG.
JAPANESE AND SOUTH KOREAN
OFFICIALS SAY IT FLEW FOR 30
MINUTES OVER A DISTANCE OF 430
MILES BEFORE PLUNGING INTO THE
SEA OF JAPAN, JUST 60 MILES
SOUTH OF VLADIVOSTOK IN RUSSIA.
THE WHITE HOUSE SAID IN A
STATEMENT:
"WITH THE MISSILE IMPACTING SO
CLOSE TO RUSSIAN SOIL, IN FACT,
CLOSER TO RUSSIA THAN TO JAPAN,
THE PRESIDENT CANNOT IMAGINE
THAT RUSSIA IS PLEASED."
THE STATEMENT WENT ON TO SAY IN
PART, "NORTH KOREA HAS BEEN A
FLAGRANT MENACE FOR FAR TOO
LONG" AND CALLED FOR STRONGER
SANCTIONS.
THE U.S. AMBASSADOR TO THE
UNITED NATIONS, NIKKI HALEY,
CLAIMED TODAY THAT NORTH KOREAN
LEADER KIM JONG UN IS IN A
"STATE OF PARANOIA."
HALEY ALSO RESPONDED TO
COMMENTS YESTERDAY FROM A SENIOR
NORTH KOREAN OFFICIAL THAT THE
NORTH MIGHT BE OPEN TO DIRECT
TALKS WITH PRESIDENT TRUMP UNDER
WHAT SHE CALLED THE RIGHT
CONDITIONS.
>> HAVING A MISSILE TEST IS NOT
THE WAY TO SIT DOWN WITH THE
PRESIDENT, BECAUSE HE'S
ABSOLUTELY NOT GOING TO DO IT.
AND I CAN TELL YOU, HE CAN SIT
THERE AND SAY ALL THE CONDITIONS
HE WANTS; UNTIL HE MEETS OUR
CONDITIONS, WE'RE NOT SITTING
DOWN WITH HIM.
>> Sreenivasan: THE LAST TIME
THE U.S. AND NORTH KOREA ENGAGED
IN SIX-PARTY TALKS ABOUT NORTH
KOREA'S WEAPONS PROGRAMS WAS
2008, AND CHRISTOPHER HILL LED
THE U.S. DELEGATION.
HILL WAS THE U.S. AMBASSADOR TO
SOUTH KOREA DURING THE BUSH
ADMINISTRATION.
HE'S NOW THE DEAN OF THE JOSEF
KORBEL SCHOOL OF INTERNATIONAL
STUDIES AT THE UNIVERSITY OF
DENVER AND JOINS ME FROM DENVER.
FIRST OF ALL, ARE YOU SURPRISED
THAT JUST DAYS AFTER SOUTH KOREA
ELECTS A PRESIDENT, NORTH KOREA
DOES THIS?
>> I'M REALLY NOT SURPRISED.
I MEAN FRANKLY THIS IS A
MILITARY TESTING PROGRAM, SO WE
THEY DON'T REALLY CARE WHAT THE
REST OF US THINK.
AN EVEN THOUGH THE NEW SOUTH
KOREAN PRESIDENT SPENT A GOOD
DEAL OF TIME ON THE CAMPAIGN
TRAIL TALKING ABOUT HIS DESIRE
TO HAVE SOME DIALOGUE WITH THE
NORTH KOREANS, FRANKLY SPEAKING,
I DON'T THINK THEY REALLY CARE
AND SO THIS IS THE RESULT.
>> Sreenivasan: WHAT ARE THE
INTERESTS IN NORTH KOREA RIGHT
NOW?
I MEAN, WE SEEM TO HEAR THAT AT
LEAST THERE IS SOME DIPLOMATIC
GESTURE TO THE UNITED STATES TO
TRY TO GET TALKS GOING BUT
NEITHER SIDE CAN AGREE ON WHAT
THE PRECONDITIONS CAN BE TO GET
THOSE TALKS TO START.
>> FRANKLY WHEN THE U.S. TALKS
ABOUT PRECONDITIONS WHAT THEY
ARE TRYING TO SAY IS WE WILL
TALK TO THE NORTH KOREANS ON THE
BASIS OF GETTING RID OF THE
NUCLEAR WEAPONS, SOMETHING THEY
ALREADY AGREED TO WAY BACK IN
2005.
WHEN THE NORTH KOREANS SAY THEY
WILL TALK TO THE U.S., IT HAS TO
DO WITH ONE NUCLEAR POWER TO
ANOTHER.
>> Sreenivasan: DOES THE
RELATIONSHIP THAT THE UNITED
STATES HAS WITH CHINA AND
RUSSIA, ARE THEY STRONG ENOUGH
TO HAVE LEVERAGE ON NORTH KOREA?
BECAUSE IT DOESN'T SEEM TO HAVE
BEEN WORKING SO FAR?
>> WELL, CERTAINLY PRESIDENT
TRUMP HAS INVESTED A LOT AND A
REALLY SERIOUS EFFORT TO BRING
THE CHINESE ON BOARD.
AND HE'S MADE IT CLEAR TO THE
CHINESE, LOOK, WE HAVE A LOT OF
ISSUES BUT THIS IS NUMBER ONE.
SO I THINK THAT'S KIND OF A GOOD
APPROACH FOR THE CHINESE IN
KIND OF KEEPING AT THEM ON THIS
AND MAKING SURE THAT AT A
MINIMUM THE U.N. SANCTIONS ARE
FULLY LIVED UP TO.
AND THERE CHINA HAS WORK TO DO.
WITH RESPECT TO RUSSIA, I THINK
IT'S KIND OF A SECONDARY ISSUE.
THEY SEEM TO BE MORE FOCUSED ON
WHETHER THERE IS ANYTHING THEY
CAN DO TOGETHER IN SYRIA.
>> MEANWHILE OUR ALLIES, JAPAN
AND SOUTH KOREA ARE IN THE
NEIGHBORHOOD AND THE TENSION IS
INCREASING.
>> TENSION IS DEFINITELY
ONE OF THE DOWNSIDE, OF COURSE,
OF TALKING TO THE CHINESE IS
BOTH THE JAPANESE AND SOUTH
KOREANS GET A LITTLE NERVOUS
ABOUT THAT.
ESPECIALLY AS WE HAVE NO
AMBASSADORS IN THE REGION,
SO THEY DON'T FEEL REASSURED
ALL THE TIME.
AND IN PARTICULAR, THE SOUTH
KOREANS ARE CONCERNED WHEN THEY
TALK TO THE CHINESE, THAT IT
APPEARS TO BE, YOU ARE TALKING
ABOUT THE KOREAN PENINSULA, YOU
ARE TALKING ESSENTIALLY ABOUT
THEM WITHOUT THEM.
SO IT'S VERY IMPORTANT THAT WE
KIND OF ENGAGE WITH THEM ON A
DAILY BASIS.
>> ARE STARTING TALKS THE RIGHT
STEP?
IS THAT THE COURSE THE
ADMINISTRATION SHOULD PURSUE
CONSIDERING THAT NORTH KOREA HAS
BEEN SO FLAGRANTLY VIOLATING SO
MANY OF THE AGREEMENTS THAT THEY
MADE?
>> I HAVE SERIOUS DOUBTS ABOUT
STARTING TALKS AT THIS POINT.
THERE IS NO INDICATION THAT THE
NORTH KOREANS HAVE THE SLIGHTEST
INTEREST IN DENUCLEARIZATION.
I THINK KIM JUNG UN'S FATHER DID
AND CERTAINLY CARED WHAT THE
CHINESE THOUGHT.
BUT KIM JUNG UN DOESN'T SEEM TO
CARE AT ALL WHAT CHINA THINGS,
WHAT WE THINK, WHAT ANY OF THE
OTHER SIX PARTY PARTICIPATES
THINK.
THEY SEEM TO WANT TO HAVE TALKS
WITH US AS ONE NUCLEAR POWER TO
ANOTHER.
>> Sreenivasan: PRESIDENT
TRUMP HAS SAID HE WOULD BE
HONORED TO MEET WITH KIM JUNG UN
UNDER THE RIGHT CIRCUMSTANCES.
JUST THAT KIND OF A STATEMENT
ALONE, COULD YOU HAVE IMAGINED
YOUR BOSS AT THE TIME, PRESIDENT
BUSH, MAKING IT OR PRESIDENT
OBAMA MAKING IT AND DOES IT
MATTER?
>> I CAN'T IMAGINE ANYONE USING
A FORMULATION LIKE THAT BUT
LET'S UNDERSTAND, OUR PRESIDENT,
ALL OF THESE KINDS OF ISSUES ARE
NEW TO HIM.
AND I THINK HE WAS PROBABLY
TRYING TO SAY TO THE CHINESE
LOOK, I'M WILLING TO BE POLITE
TO THESE GUYS BUT THEY HAVE TO
COME FORWARD.
SO I THINK IT WAS PROBABLY IN
THE CONTEXT OF TRYING TO SHOW
THE CHINESE YES, WE'LL GIVE IT
THE COLLEGE TRY ON HAVING TALKS.
>> Sreenivasan: FORMER U.S.
AMBASSADOR TO SOUTH KOREA,
CHRISTOPHER HILL, THANKS SO
MUCH.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Sreenivasan: RESPONDING TO
CRITICISM OVER THE FIRING OF
F.B.I. DIRECTOR JAMES COMEY,
AMBASSADOR NIKKI HALEY ALSO
DEFENDED THE PRESIDENT'S ACTION
AND COMMENTED ON REPORTS THAT
MR. TRUMP HAD PRESSED COMEY FOR
A PLEDGE OF LOYALTY.
>> THE PRESIDENT IS THE CEO OF
THE COUNTRY.
HE CAN HIRE AND FIRE WHOEVER HE
WANTS.
THAT'S HIS RIGHT.
I THINK WHEN YOU TAKE THE JOB,
YOU AUTOMATICALLY ASSUME THAT
YOU WORK FOR THE PRESIDENT AND
YOU ARE PART OF A TEAM AND
LOYALTY IS A BIG THING.
>> Sreenivasan: FORMER DIRECTOR
OF INTELLIGENCE JAMES CLAPPER
SAID TODAY THAT ACTIONS BY THE
WHITE HOUSE OVER THE PAST WEEK
MAY BE ERODING THE MECHANISMS OF
THE U.S. GOVERNMENT.
>> I THINK, IN MANY WAYS, OUR
INSTITUTIONS ARE UNDER ASSAULT,
BOTH EXTERNALLY-- AND THAT'S...
THAT'S THE BIG NEWS HERE, IS
RUSSIAN INTERFERENCE IN OUR
ELECTION SYSTEM-- AND I THINK,
AS WELL, OUR INSTITUTIONS ARE
UNDER ASSAULT INTERNALLY.
>> INTERNALLY FROM THE
PRESIDENT?
>> EXACTLY.
>> Sreenivasan: URGING THAT A
REPLACEMENT FOR COMEY COME FROM
OUTSIDE THE POLITICAL ARENA,
REPUBLICAN SENATOR LINDSEY
GRAHAM SAID TODAY THAT THE NEW
F.B.I. DIRECTOR'S LOYALTY SHOULD
LIE WITH THE LAW.
>> TO ME IT'S LIKE APPOINTING A
JUDGE.
THE PRESIDENT ACTUALLY APPOINTS
A JUDGE, BUT THE JUDGE IS LOYAL
TO THE LAW.
THE PRESIDENT APPOINTS THE
F.B.I. DIRECTOR, BUT THE F.B.I.
DIRECTOR HAS TO BE LOYAL TO THE
LAW.
>> Sreenivasan: SENATE
MINORITY LEADER CHUCK SCHUMER
TODAY ENDORSED AN IDEA BY
DEMOCRATIC SENATOR MARK WARNER
THAT SENATE DEMOCRATS WITHHOLD
VOTES FOR AN F.B.I. DIRECTOR,
UNLESS THE JUSTICE DEPARTMENT
APPOINTS AN INDEPENDENT SPECIAL
PROSECUTOR TO INVESTIGATE
POSSIBLE TIES BETWEEN THE TRUMP
CAMPAIGN AND RUSSIA.
>> TO HAVE THAT SPECIAL
PROSECUTOR, PEOPLE WOULD BREATHE
A SIGH OF RELIEF, BECAUSE THEN
THERE WOULD BE A REAL
INDEPENDENT PERSON OVERLOOKING
THE F.B.I. DIRECTOR.
>> Sreenivasan: CLIMATE CHANGE
IS ONE OF THE ISSUES THAT HAS
DIVIDED DEMOCRATS AND
REPUBLICANS.
DEMOCRATS, GENERALLY SPEAKING,
HAVE PUSHED POLICIES TO ADDRESS
GLOBAL WARMING-- REDUCING THE
AIR POLLUTION CAUSED BY BURNING
FOSSIL FUELS AND DEVELOPING
ALTERNATIVE FORMS OF ENERGY.
AMONG REPUBLICANS, THERE IS A
VOCAL WING OF THE PARTY THAT HAS
DENIED CLIMATE CHANGE ALTOGETHER
AS A PROBLEM AND QUESTIONED
WHETHER HUMANS ARE RESPONSIBLE.
VIEWS ALSO ASSOCIATED WITH
PRESIDENT TRUMP.
BUT IN TONIGHT'S SIGNATURE
SEGMENT, NEWSHOUR WEEKEND
SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT STEPHANIE
SY REPORTS ON THE "ECO-RIGHT,"
THE GROWING NUMBER OF
CONSERVATIVE, REPUBLICAN VOICES
CALLING FOR ACTION ON CLIMATE
CHANGE.
>> HEY, HEY!
HO, HO!
FOSSIL FUELS HAVE GOT TO GO!
>> Reporter: IN THE RISING ECO-
RIGHT MOVEMENT, YOU COULD SAY
THESE ARE THE ECO-RIGHTEOUS.
FOSSIL FUELS HAVE GOT TO GO!
>> Reporter: AMONG THE THRONGS
OF ENVIRONMENTALISTS AT THE
CLIMATE MARCH IN WASHINGTON LAST
MONTH, THEY STAND OUT BECAUSE
THEY NOT ONLY CHANT, THEY PRAY.
>> I PRAY THAT YOU WOULD HELP
PEOPLE TO LISTEN SO THAT
WE CAN IMPACT THIS WORLD, YOUR
CREATION, IN A POSITIVE WAY.
>> THIS IS WHAT DEMOCRACY LOOKS
LIKE!
>> Reporter: AT 27, KYLE
MEYAARD-SCHAAP IS THE LEADER OF
THE YOUNG EVANGELICALS FOR
CLIMATE ACTION, A GROUP THAT'S
GROWN TO 10,000 MEMBERS IN THE
PAST FIVE YEARS.
>> THERE'S A GENERAL PERCEPTION
OUT THERE THAT EVANGELICALS ARE
APATHETIC OR ANTAGONISTIC TOWARD
CLIMATE CHANGE.
AND THAT'S JUST NOT THE CASE.
>> WE KEEP HEARING THAT 2014 HAS
BEEN THE WARMEST YEAR ON RECORD.
>> Reporter: THAT PERCEPTION
COMES IN PART FROM THIS MOMENT
TWO YEARS AGO WHEN REPUBLICAN
OKLAHOMA SENATOR JAMES INHOFE
WHO HAS SAID THAT ONLY GOD
CONTROLS THE WEATHER, BROUGHT A
SNOWBALL ONTO THE SENATE FLOOR
TO PROVE THE EARTH IS NOT
WARMING.
>> FOR A LOT OF THE MORE
CONSERVATIVE LAWMAKERS WHO HAVE
BEEN ABLE TO DEPEND ON SUPPORT
FROM AN EVANGELICAL VOTING BLOC
WE WANT THEM TO HEAR US SAYING,
"IF YOU WANT TO CONTINUE TO BE
ABLE TO DEPEND ON THIS VOTING
BLOC, YOU NEED TO START
LISTENING TO WHAT THE NEXT
GENERATION OF EVANGELICALS ARE
SAYING IS IMPORTANT TO THEM."
AND MORE AND MORE, WE'RE SAYING
WITH A LOUDER AND LOUDER VOICE,
"THAT'S CLIMATE."
>> MAY OUR WORK FOR CLIMATE
ACTION BE A WITNESS THAT POINTS
TO YOU TRIUNE GOD.
>> Reporter: AFTER THE CLIMATE
MARCH, HIS GROUP GATHERED AT THE
U.S. CAPITOL TO REHEARSE TALKING
POINTS TO USE WHEN LOBBYING
MEMBERS OF CONGRESS.
>> LET US NOW OFFER PRAYERS FOR
OUR POLITICAL LEADERS.
>> Reporter: THE GENERATIONAL
SHIFT IN REPUBLICAN LEADERS IS
PERSONIFIED BY 37-YEAR-OLD
FLORIDA CONGRESSMAN CARLOS
CURBELO.
HE VOTED WITH THE PARTY TO
REPEAL THE AFFORDABLE CARE ACT
BUT HE'S BUCKING THE PARTY
LEADERSHIP ON CLIMATE CHANGE.
WE MET UP WITH HIM AT A SOLAR-
POWERED FARM IN HIS DISTRICT,
JUST SOUTH OF MIAMI.
>> PEOPLE HERE LIVE BETWEEN THE
EVERGLADES AND THE OCEAN, SO THE
ENVIRONMENT IS ALWAYS ON OUR
MINDS.
>> Reporter: LAST YEAR, CURBELO
AND FLORIDA DEMOCRAT TED DEUTCH
CO-FOUNDED THE BIPARTISAN
CLIMATE SOLUTIONS CAUCUS.
IT NOW HAS 38 MEMBERS IN THE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES.
>> IT'S WHAT WE CALL A NOAH'S
ARK CAUCUS.
YOU CAN ONLY JOIN IF YOU
IDENTIFY A MEMBER OF THE
OPPOSING PARTY TO JOIN WITH YOU,
SO IT KIND OF FORCES
BIPARTISANSHIP, AND THE CAUCUS
IS EQUALLY REPUBLICAN AND
DEMOCRAT.
I NEVER THOUGHT THAT WE WOULD
GROW SO FAST.
>> Reporter: CURBELO'S
CONSTITUENTS ARE ALREADY LIVING
WITH THE EFFECTS OF GLOBAL
WARMING, SUCH AS HIGH TIDES THAT
REACH HIGHER EVERY YEAR AND
FLOOD RESIDENTS EVEN ON SUNNY
DAYS, DEPRESSING PROPERTY
VALUES.
THEY'RE EXPERIENCING THE THREATS
OF RISING SEA LEVELS, COASTAL
EROSION, LOSS OF WILDLIFE, THE
ZIKA VIRUS, ALL OF WHICH
SCIENTISTS SAY ARE WORSENED BY
CLIMATE CHANGE.
CURBELO SUPPORTS CONTINUING AND
EXPANDING SUBSIDIES FOR CARBON-
FREE AND RENEWABLE ENERGY
SOURCES.
>> MOST MEMBERS OF CONGRESS ARE
OPEN TO THIS IDEA OF THE UNITED
STATES LEADING AN ENERGY
REVOLUTION IN THE WORLD,
INNOVATING, CREATING THE JOBS OF
THE FUTURE TODAY AND ONE OF MY
MAJOR PRIORITIES IN TAX REFORM
IS TO PROTECT THE SOLAR AND WIND
TAX CREDITS THAT ARE IN PLACE
TODAY.
>> Reporter: AT 96, GEORGE
SHULTZ, A FORMER CABINET
SECRETARY TO PRESIDENTS REAGAN
AND NIXON, WHOSE ADMINISTRATION
CREATED THE ENVIRONMENTAL
PROTECTION AGENCY, IS WEIGHING
INTO THE DEBATE.
>> USE THE MARKETPLACE.
DO IT THE REAGAN WAY.
>> Reporter: HE'S TOUTING A
SOLUTION TO CURB CARBON-DIOXIDE
EMISSIONS CONSISTENT WITH WHAT
HE CONSIDERS "REPUBLICAN
PRINCIPLES."
>> YOU DON'T HAVE TO RELY ON ANY
FANCY SCIENCE TO FIGURE OUT THAT
THE GLOBE IS WARMING.
THAT IS A FACT.
BUT IF YOU HAVE QUESTIONS ABOUT
IT, WHY DON'T YOU TAKE OUT AN
INSURANCE POLICY, BECAUSE THE
CONSEQUENCES ARE CONSIDERABLE.
>> Reporter: FOR SHULTZ, THE
INSURANCE POLICY IS A PLAN HE'S
PUT OUT AS A MEMBER OF THE
CLIMATE LEADERSHIP COUNCIL-- "A
CONSERVATIVE CASE FOR CARBON
DIVIDENDS."
THE PROPOSAL IS TO CHARGE ENERGY
COMPANIES A TAX, SAY $40, FOR
EVERY TON OF CARBON THAT COMES
OUT OF MINING COAL OR REFINING
OIL.
THE PROCEEDS WOULD BE
DISTRIBUTED BACK TO AMERICANS,
A CARBON DIVIDEND, WORTH AROUND
$2,000 A YEAR FOR A FAMILY OF
FOUR.
THE TRADEOFF?
THE PLAN WOULD STRIP AWAY MUCH
OF THE E.P.A.'S AUTHORITY TO
REGULATE CARBON EMISSIONS AND
CANCEL PRESIDENT OBAMA'S CLEAN
POWER PLAN.
>> Reporter: IT MAY SURPRISE YOU
TO LEARN THAT MANY OF THE
WORLD'S LARGEST OIL COMPANIES
SAY THEY'D SUPPORT A CARBON TAX,
INCLUDING EXXONMOBIL, WHICH TOLD
NEWSHOUR WEEKEND: "WE SUPPORT
CARBON POLICIES THAT WOULD
ENSURE A UNIFORM AND PREDICTABLE
COST OF CARBON ACROSS THE
ECONOMY."
CURRENTLY NO REPUBLICAN IN
CONGRESS HAS ENDORSED SHULTZ'S
CARBON TAX PLAN, ALTHOUGH
DEMOCRATIC SENATOR SHELDON
WHITEHOUSE OF RHODE ISLAND SAYS
PRIVATELY, SOME DO.
HE INTRODUCED A SIMILAR PLAN IN
2015.
>> VIRTUALLY EVERY REPUBLICAN
WHO HAS LOOKED AT THE CLIMATE
CHANGE PROBLEM AND COME TO A
SOLUTION COMES TO THE SAME
SOLUTION, WHICH IS A PRICE ON
CARBON, A MARKET SIGNAL THAT IS
REVENUE-NEUTRAL AND GIVES ALL
THE MONEY BACK TO THE PUBLIC.
AND I THINK OUR ANSWER IS, "YES,
YES, WE'LL DO THAT."
SO, WE AGREE ON THE GETAWAY CAR,
WE AGREE ON THE NEED FOR ESCAPE,
AND REALLY THE LAST POLITICAL
PROBLEM IS HOW YOU GET
REPUBLICANS THROUGH THAT KILL
ZONE THAT THE FOSSIL FUEL
INDUSTRY HAS SET UP IN CONGRESS.
>> Reporter: THE FOSSIL FUEL
INDUSTRY HAS ACTUALLY COME OUT
IN FAVOR OF SOME SORT OF CARBON
PRICING. DO YOU VIEW THEM AS
GENUINE ALLIES ON CLIMATE
ACTION?
>> NO.
EVERY PART OF THE FOSSIL FUEL
INDUSTRY'S AND BIG OIL'S
POLITICAL APPARATUS IS STILL
LINED UP TO SAY, "IF YOU DARE
TALK ABOUT A CARBON PRICE, WE
ARE COMING AFTER YOU."
>> THE CARBON TAX MAY BE A GOOD
IDEA.
IT'S NOT DOABLE.
EVEN A REVENUE-NEUTRAL CARBON
TAX.
>> Reporter: ANDY SABIN, IS A
LONGTIME REPUBLICAN PARTY DONOR,
WHO MADE HIS FORTUNE FROM A
METAL RECYCLING BUSINESS. HE
SEES CLIMATE CHANGE AS AN URGENT
PROBLEM, BUT A CARBON TAX AS
POLITICALLY DEAD ON ARRIVAL.
>> KELLYANNE, HOUSE LEADERSHIP,
TILLERSON.
>> Reporter: SABIN CONTRIBUTED
MORE THAN $700,000 TO REPUBLICAN
CANDIDATES IN LAST YEAR'S
ELECTION, INCLUDING THOSE HE
FEELS SUPPORT ENVIRONMENTAL
ISSUES.
BUT HE ALSO DONATED $100,000 TO
PRESIDENT TRUMP'S INAUGURATION,
EVEN THOUGH TRUMP HAS CALLED
MAN-MADE CLIMATE CHANGE A "HOAX"
AND IS CONSIDERING WITHDRAWING
FROM THE 2015 PARIS CLIMATE
ACCORDS, WHEN THE U.S. PLEDGED
TO SIGNIFICANTLY REDUCE CARBON
DIOXIDE EMISSIONS.
>> I TALK TO FRIENDS IN THE
WHITE HOUSE ABOUT THE PARIS
CLIMATE CHANGE AGREEMENT.
I'M CONSTANTLY TEXTING PEOPLE
VERY CLOSE TO THE PRESIDENT.
I WANT TO BE HIS ENVIRONMENTAL
ADVISOR, SO HE COULD AT LEAST
HEAR THE OTHER SIDE.
AND I'M HOPEFUL HE'S GOING TO
SAY, "HEY, MAYBE I SHOULD TAKE A
LOOK AT THE ENVIRONMENT?"
>> Reporter: SABIN SPENDS HIS
FREE TIME TAKING CARE OF HIS
MENAGERIE OF ANIMALS AND TENDING
TO HIS ORGANIC GARDEN.
WHAT DO YOU THINK THE SOLUTIONS
ARE TO LOWERING CARBON
EMISSIONS?
>> I THINK WE'RE ON THE TRACK
NOW.
I BELIEVE IN OBVIOUSLY WIND,
SOLAR, HYDRO, MODULAR NUCLEAR,
ALL OF THESE THINGS.
WHAT'S NICE IS THE RENEWABLE
ENERGY IS BECOMING MUCH CHEAPER
THAN FOSSIL FUELS.
>> Reporter: AN ARDENT NATURE
LOVER WHO BUYS PRIME REAL ESTATE
ON NEW YORK'S LONG ISLAND JUST
FOR CONSERVATION, SABIN HAS ALSO
GIVEN MILLIONS TO ENDOW COLUMBIA
UNIVERSITY'S SABIN CENTER FOR
CLIMATE CHANGE LAW.
>> THE REAL SOLUTION, BIGGEST
SOLUTION, STOP CUTTING DOWN
TREES AND PLANT NEW TREES.
>> Reporter: THAT'S CARBON
CAPTURE.
>> RIGHT.
BUT THAT'S NATURAL CARBON
CAPTURE.
>> Reporter: FLORIDA CONGRESSMAN
CARLOS CURBELO DISAGREES WITH
PRESIDENT TRUMP'S ATTEMPTS TO
DISMANTLE THE CLEAN POWER PLAN.
AND HE'S CONSIDERING THE CARBON
TAX.
>> I'M TRYING TO AVOID GOING OUT
THERE AND ENDORSING OR REJECTING
SPECIFIC IDEAS.
MY POINT IS WE HAVE TO DO
SOMETHING, AND IF WE'RE GOING TO
GET RID OF THE REGULATIONS LIKE
THE CLEAN POWER PLAN, WHAT'S THE
ALTERNATIVE?
THERE MUST BE AN ALTERNATIVE.
>> Reporter: THE POLITICAL
MOMENTUM FOR REPUBLICAN
SOLUTIONS TO CLIMATE CHANGE IS
OVERLAPPING WITH ANOTHER
REALITY-- SHIFTING PUBLIC
OPINION.
A NATIONAL SURVEY BY YALE AND
GEORGE MASON UNIVERSITIES LAST
DECEMBER FOUND HALF OF TRUMP
VOTERS THINK GLOBAL WARMING IS
HAPPENING.
SIX IN TEN TRUMP VOTERS
SUPPORTED TAXING OR REGULATING
THE POLLUTION CAUSING IT.
FOR THE VARIED VOICES IN THE
RISING ECO-RIGHT MOVEMENT, IT'S
A MATTER OF MAKING THE ISSUE A
PRIORITY FOR REPUBLICANS BY
SPEAKING THEIR LANGUAGE.
>> AND THE RECONCILING SAVING
WORK OF CHRIST EXTENDS TO THE
ENTIRE CREATED WORLD.
>> Reporter: YOUNG EVANGELICAL
LEADER KYLE MEYAARD-SCHAAP
ARGUES CLIMATE ACTION IS IN LINE
WITH OTHER CHRISTIAN VALUES,
INCLUDING ANTI-ABORTION VIEWS.
>> TO BE PRO-LIFE MEANS THAT YOU
CARE ABOUT HUMAN LIFE, YOU CARE
ABOUT HUMAN FLOURISHING FREE
FROM THE IMPACTS OF A CHANGING
CLIMATE ON PEOPLE'S ABILITY TO
GROW THEIR FOOD AND PROVIDE FOR
THEIR FAMILIES.
>> Reporter: REPUBLICAN DONOR
ANDY SABIN HIGHLIGHTS THE PUBLIC
HEALTH HAZARDS.
>> IF YOU REALLY WANT TO RELATE
TO A WORKING-CLASS REPUBLICAN,
TELL HIM HE'S GOING TO LIVE
LONGER, TELL HIM HIS HEALTH
BILLS ARE GOING TO GO DOWN, AND
HE MAY NOT GET CANCER OR ASTHMA
OR HEART DISEASE.
THAT RESONATES WITH SOMEBODY.
>> Reporter: AND GEORGE SHULTZ,
THE REPUBLICAN STATESMAN
PROMOTING THE FREE MARKET FIX,
SAYS FOR THE SAKE OF HIS
GRANDCHILDREN AND GREAT
GRANDCHILDREN, HE HOPES HISTORY
COMES FULL CIRCLE.
>> THE ORIGINAL GUY WHO WORRIED
ABOUT THE ENVIRONMENT WAS A
REPUBLICAN, TEDDY ROOSEVELT.
PRESIDENT REAGAN DID THE OZONE
LAYER, PRESIDENT H.W. BUSH DID
THE ACID RAIN PROBLEM.
THE RECORD SHOWS THIS IS A
REPUBLICAN ISSUE.
READ GEORGE TAKEI'S THOUGHTS ON
HIS NEW MUSICAL AND THE HISTORY
OF JAPANESE-AMERICAN
INTERNMENT.
VISIT www.pbs.org/newshour.
>> Sreenivasan: ON THIS MOTHER'S
DAY, WE CALL YOUR ATTENTION TO A
VERY SOBERING FACT: THE UNITED
STATES HAS THE WORST RATE OF
MOTHERS DYING DURING PREGNANCY,
CHILDBIRTH, OR POSTPARTUM THAN
ANY COUNTRY IN THE DEVELOPED
WORLD.
THE "MATERNAL MORTALITY RATE" IS
26 WOMEN FOR EVERY 100,000 LIVE
BIRTHS IN THE U.S.
NPR AND PROPUBLICA LAST WEEK
PUBLISHED A JOINT INVESTIGATION
INTO THE REASONS BEHIND THIS
PROBLEM, AND PROPUBLICA
REPORTER NINA MARTIN JOINS ME
FROM OAKLAND, CALIFORNIA, TO
DISCUSS WHAT THEY FOUND.
FIRST OF ALL, PUT THAT NUMBER
INTO PERSPECTIVE, 26 OUT OF
100,000 DOESN'T SOUNDER LIKE
MUCH.
HOW DOES THAT TACK STACK UP
AGAINST THE REST OF WHO WE
COMPARE OURSELVES TO.
>> 26 OUT OF 100,000 TRANSLATES
TO 7 TO 900 WOMEN A A YEAR IN
THE U.S. WHICH COMPARES TO 7 OUT
OF 100,000 IN CANADA, A THINK
FOUR OUT OF 100,000 IN MOST OF
THE SCANDINAVIAN COUNTRIES.
>> YOU HAD A CHARACTER IN THIS
TRAGIC STORY ABOUT A NEO
NATAL NURSE, SOMEONE WHO
WORKS AROUND BABIES HER WHOLE
LIFE AND SHE IS THE CENTRAL
CHARACTER IN YOUR STORY.
AND IT ENDS UP HIGHLIGHTING SO
MUCH OF WHAT IS WRONG IN THE
SYSTEM.
BY TEXTBOOK SHE HAD A VERY GOOD
PREGNANCY.
SHE WAS HEALTHY.
SHE DID EVERYTHING RIGHT.
SHE HAD ACCESS TO GOOD HEALTH
CARE.
SHE DELIVERED BABY WELL.
AND YET HOW IS IT POSSIBLE THAT
SHE IS ONE OF THE PEOPLE THAT
ENDS UP AS ONE OF THESE
STATISTICS?
>> I THINK THERE IS A LOT OF
PEOPLE WHO ASSUME THAT WOMEN
WITHOUT DIE IN CHILD BIRTH OR
PREGNANCY-RELATED CAUSES IN THE
U.S. ARE SORT OF POOR, THEY HAVE
BAD HEALTH CARE, THEY HAVE
PREEXISTING CONDITIONS, THEY ARE
UNHEALTHY, THEY DON'T GET GOOD
PRENATAL CARE, THERE ARE
ALL KINDS OF THINGS THAT WE SORT
OF ASSUME THAT THE EXPLANATIONS.
AND LAUREN HAD ALL OF THOSE
THINGS.
I THINK THAT ONE OF THE BIG
ISSUES THAT WE HAVEN'T REALLY
LOOKED AT IN THIS COUNTRY SO
MUCH AROUND MATERNAL CARE IS
EVERYBODY SORT OF SAID OH, LOOK,
WE'RE SO MUCH BETTER THAN WE
USED TO BE.
800 WOMEN IN THIS COUNTRY USED
TO DIE EVERY DAY IN CHILD BIRTH.
WE'VE LIVED THAT PROBLEM.
MEANWHILE BABIES ARE DYING,
LET'S FOCUS ON THE BABIES.
BUT WE'VE SORT OF TAKEN THE OUR
EYE OFF MATERNAL HEALTH.
SO WE DON'T REALLY THINK ABOUT
THE KINDS OF SAFETY, REALLY
BASIC SAFETY THINGS THAT NEED TO
BE PUT AM PLACE JUST TO KEEP
MOMS SAFE.
AND THAT'S A LITTLE BIG PART OF
WHAT IS HAPPENING.
IT'S THAT 60% OF THE DEATHS IN
THE U.S., AT LEAST, ARE
PREVENTABLE.
>> Sreenivasan: YOU ALSO SEEM
TO HIGHLIGHT THAT THERE NOT A
STANDARD HOSPITAL PROTOCOL TO
DEAL WITH COMPLICATIONS, SO
REALLY THE ONES THAT COULD HAVE
BEEN PREVENT DEATH END UP
CASCADING OUT OF CONTROL INTO
SOMETHING MUCH BIGGER.
>> YES.
SO AGAIN, NONE OF THIS IS, YOU
KNOW, THE THINGS THAT NEED TO BE
DONE TO PREVENT WOMEN FROM DYING
OR NEARLY DYING IN CHILD BIRTH
IN THE U.S. ARE PRETTY
WELL-KNOWN.
WHAT LAUREN HAD WAS A CONDITION
CALLED PREECLAMPSIA.
200,000 WOMEN A YEAR DEVELOP
PREECLAMPSIA IN THE U.S.
IT'S TEXT BOOK, EVERYBODY KNOWS
WHAT YOU ARE SUPPOSED TO DO.
IT IS NOT THAT HER CAREGIVERS
WEREN'T GOOD DOCTORS BUT DIDN'T
RECOGNIZE WHAT WAS GOING ON
BECAUSE THEY WEREN'T ON THE SAME
PAGE ABOUT, YOU KNOW, WHAT THE
STANDARDS ARE.
AND WHAT WE SHOULD DO WHEN
CERTAIN STANDARDS HIT.
AND OVERALL IN THE U.S. I THINK
THAT THIS IS A PROBLEM BECAUSE
MATERNAL COMPLICATIONS ARE
THOUGHT NOT TO BE VERY COMMON
BUT THEY ARE ACTUALLY MUCH MORE
COMMON THAN DOCTORS AND NURSES
REALIZE.
AND THEY'RE NOT, AND A LOT OF
HOSPITALS AND PROVIDERS,
DOCTORS, INDIVIDUAL NURSES ARE
NOT PREPARED FOR THE WORST.
THEY EXPECT THE BEST.
THEY'RE NOT PREPARED FOR THE
WORST.
>> Sreenivasan: ALL RIGHT,
NINA MARTIN OF PROPUBLICA THANKS
SO MUCH FOR JOINING US.
>> THANK YOU.
>>THIS IS PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND,
SUNDAY.
>> Sreenivasan: THE EUROPEAN
UNION'S POLICE AGENCY SAID TODAY
THAT LAST WEEK'S MASSIVE
RANSOMWARE CYBER -ATTACK WAS
EVEN MORE WIDESPREAD THAN FIRST
THOUGHT.
EUROPOL'S DIRECTOR, ROB
WAINWRIGHT, SAID THE
UNPRECEDENTED GLOBAL ATTACK
IMPACTED AT LEAST 200,000
VICTIMS MANY OF THEM BUSINESSES,
ACROSS 150 COUNTRIES.
AND HE SAID EVEN MORE DAMAGE
COULD BE DISCOVERED WHEN PEOPLE
RETURN TO WORK TOMORROW.
EUROPOL SAID IT'S STILL TOO
EARLY TO DETERMINE WHO LAUNCHED
THE EXTORTION ATTACK.
INDEPENDENT CENTRIST EMMANUEL
MACRON WAS INAUGURATED AS
FRANCE'S NEW PRESIDENT TODAY,
ONE WEEK AFTER HE TROUNCED
RIGHT-WING POPULIST MARINE LE
PEN IN THE RUN-OFF ELECTION.
AT 39, MACRON, WHO TOOK OVER
FROM SOCIALIST FRANCOIS
HOLLANDE, IS FRANCE'S YOUNGEST
LEADER SINCE NAPOLEON BONAPARTE.
IN HIS INAUGURATION SPEECH,
MACRON VOWED TO FIGHT TERRORISM,
AND TO WORK FOR A "MORE
EFFICIENT, MORE DEMOCRATIC"
EUROPEAN UNION.
>> THE WORLD AND EUROPE NEED
FRANCE MORE THAN EVER.
THEY NEED A STRONG FRANCE WHICH
IS CONFIDENT IN ITS DESTINY.
THEY NEED A FRANCE WHICH SPEAKS
OUT LOUDLY FOR FREEDOM AND
SOLIDARITY.
THEY NEED A FRANCE WHICH CAN
INVENT THE FUTURE.
>> Sreenivasan: MACRON NOW MUST
FIELD CANDIDATES FOR NEXT
MONTH'S PARLIAMENTARY ELECTIONS.
CHINA'S PRESIDENT XI JINPING
PLEDGED ANOTHER $124 BILLION
TODAY FOR HIS SIGNATURE
ECONOMIC INITIATIVE, KNOWN AS
THE "SILK ROAD" PLAN.
AT A SUMMIT OF 29 LEADERS THAT
INCLUDED RUSSIA'S VLADIMIR
PUTIN, XI SAID THE MONEY WOULD
GO FOR PORTS AND RAILWAYS AND
OTHER INFRASTRUCTURE AND TO
PROMOTE TRADE WITH DOZENS OF
DEVELOPING COUNTRIES.
TRYING TO ALLAY CONCERNS IN THE
WEST THAT THE PLAN IS JUST A
WAY OF EXPANDING CHINA'S POWER
AS THE UNITED STATES TURNS
INWARD, XI SAID CHINA "HAS NO
DESIRE TO IMPOSE OUR WILL ON
OTHERS."
A U.S. DELEGATION ATTENDED THE
SUMMIT, BUT FEW OTHERS DID.
>> Sreenivasan: THE GERMAN STATE
OF NORTH RHINE-WESTPHALIA, WHERE
ONE IN FIVE VOTERS LIVE, GAVE
CHANCELLOR ANGELA MERKEL'S PARTY
A BIG WIN TODAY, INCREASING HER
CHANCES OF WINNING THE NATIONAL
ELECTION THERE IN SEPTEMBER.
SOME VOTERS SAID THEY PREFERRED
HER EXPERIENCE AND LEADERSHIP
HEADING INTO DIFFICULT
NEGOTIATIONS WITH BRITAIN AS IT
LEAVES THE EUROPEAN UNION.
AND ON THE "NEWSHOUR" TOMORROW:
AHEAD OF PRESIDENT TRUMP'S FIRST
OVERSEAS VISIT WE EXAMINE THE
FATE OF RETURNING ISIS SOLDIERS
TO TUNISIA, THE BIRTHPLACE OF
THE ARAB SPRING.
THAT'S IT FOR THIS EDITION OF
"PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND."
I'M HARI SREENIVASAN.
HAVE A GOOD NIGHT.